INTRODUCTION 3

the cause of the pagan gods. The Christian, however,
generously refers the inconsistency to a lack of fixed
guiding principle on the part of Caecilius3 the latter is
like a ship without anchorage, shifted about by every
wind of doubt and suspicion. Octavius argues thus :

1. The ordinary phenornena of nature proclaim the
existence of a supreme, intelligent power that sustains
and governs the world. This power is one, incom-
prehensible and infinite. Christian doctrine in this
matter is at one with the teaching of pagan poets and
philosophers.

2. The popular deities of heathendom are only unreal
abstractions or mere mortals deified by a grateful but
simple-minded people. Such is the testimony of history
and philosophy. Romeâ€™s greatness is not due to her
gods. ,The real character of these latter is portrayed in
pagan literature and art.

3. The charges of immorality levelled against Christi-
anity are the false concoctions of impure spirits. Paganism
is guilty of the foulest crimes.

4. Christians place the knowledge of God before
everything and are prepared to make the greatest sacri-
fices for his sake. Their theories about the final
dissolution of the world, resurrection and retribution
are seen to bc in harmony with the teachings of
Pythagoras, Plato and the Stoics. In fact common-sense
and philosophy are on the side of Christianity.

Caecilius having listened in silence to this argument
admits his defeat without awaiting the verdict of
Minucius. He embraces the new religion, but demands
further inquiry for the investigation of details. The sun

was now sinking in the west, and the friends depart
full of joy and gladness.

